guides/yearly-tasks/end-of-year/overview.mdx, before:

---
title: 'End of Year Process Overview'
description: 'Learn about the End of Year (EOY) process for creating a new budget year'
---

# End of Year Process Overview

The End of Year (EOY) process helps you transition from one financial year to the next while maintaining your budget history and setting up a fresh budget for the new year.

## When to Use

The EOY process should be initiated when:

- You're approaching the end of your financial year (June 30th)
- All transactions for the current year have been reconciled
- You're ready to start planning for the next financial year

## Process Summary

The EOY process consists of several key steps:

1. **Preparation**

   - Verify final month reconciliation
   - Check budget setup
   - Ensure all required data is in place

2. **Create New Budget**

   - Create a copy of your current budget
   - Set up the new financial year
   - Configure new year settings

3. **Manual Budget Update**

   - Update budget categories
   - Set new year budget amounts
   - Balance your budget

4. **Finalization**
   - Copy bank balances
   - Clear transaction sheets
   - Register as the new master

## Pre-EOY Checks

Before beginning the EOY process, ensure:

1. **All accounts are reconciled**

   - The LastReconciliationDate should be at or near the end of the financial year (June 30)
   - All transactions should be properly categorized and reconciled

2. **Balanced sheets**
   - Banks sheet should have a zero balance in cell C30
   - Annual Budget sheet should have a zero balance in cell B106
   - Maintain Budget sheet should have a zero balance in cell E120

## Ready to Begin?

For the complete, step-by-step instructions, please continue to the [EOY Budget Setup](/guides/yearly-tasks/end-of-year/setup) guide.

## Accessing the Process

The EOY process menu item behaves differently depending on whether you're in the original spreadsheet or a copy:

### In Original Spreadsheet

1. Navigate to the "Period Processing" menu
2. Click "End of Year Process"
3. Follow the instructions in the help dialog to create a copy

### In New Copy

1. Navigate to the "Period Processing" menu
2. Click "Run End of Year Setup"
3. Follow the setup wizard to configure your new budget

## Important Notes

- Keep your original budget spreadsheet for historical records
- Don't delete any sheets in the new copy
- Test all menu functions after setup
- Ensure you have sufficient permissions to create spreadsheet copies
- You must authorize the script in the new copy before proceeding

## Authorization Process

When you first open menu items in the new copy:

1. You'll see an "Authorization Required" dialog
2. Click "OK" to proceed
3. Select your Google account
4. Review the permissions
5. Click "Allow" to grant access
6. Wait for the authorization to complete

Commit message:

Update EOY documentation with legacy master archiving information

guides/yearly-tasks/end-of-year/overview.mdx, after:

---
title: 'End of Year Process Overview'
description: 'Learn about the End of Year (EOY) process for creating a new budget year'
---

# End of Year Process Overview

The End of Year (EOY) process helps you transition from one financial year to the next while maintaining your budget history and setting up a fresh budget for the new year.

## When to Use

The EOY process should be initiated when:

- You're approaching the end of your financial year (June 30th)
- All transactions for the current year have been reconciled
- You're ready to start planning for the next financial year

## Process Summary

The EOY process consists of several key steps:

1. **Preparation**

   - Verify final month reconciliation
   - Check budget setup
   - Ensure all required data is in place

2. **Create New Budget**

   - Create a copy of your current budget
   - Set up the new financial year
   - Configure new year settings

3. **Manual Budget Update**

   - Update budget categories
   - Set new year budget amounts
   - Balance your budget

4. **Finalization**
   - Copy bank balances
   - Clear transaction sheets
   - Register as the new master
   - Automatically archive the legacy master

## Pre-EOY Checks

Before beginning the EOY process, ensure:

1. **All accounts are reconciled**

   - The LastReconciliationDate should be at or near the end of the financial year (June 30)
   - All transactions should be properly categorized and reconciled

2. **Balanced sheets**
   - Banks sheet should have a zero balance in cell C30
   - Annual Budget sheet should have a zero balance in cell B106
   - Maintain Budget sheet should have a zero balance in cell E120

## Ready to Begin?

For the complete, step-by-step instructions, please continue to the [EOY Budget Setup](/guides/yearly-tasks/end-of-year/setup) guide.

## Accessing the Process

The EOY process menu item behaves differently depending on whether you're in the original spreadsheet or a copy:

### In Original Spreadsheet

1. Navigate to the "Period Processing" menu
2. Click "End of Year Process"
3. Follow the instructions in the help dialog to create a copy

### In New Copy

1. Navigate to the "Period Processing" menu
2. Click "Run End of Year Setup"
3. Follow the setup wizard to configure your new budget

## Legacy Master Archiving

When you finalize the EOY process in the new copy, the system will automatically:

1. Mark the new spreadsheet as the master
2. Rename the original master spreadsheet to include "\_ARCHIVED_FY{year}"
3. Add a hidden "\_Archive" sheet with metadata to the original spreadsheet

This archiving process helps maintain a clear distinction between your active budget and historical records while preserving all your previous data.

## Important Notes

- Keep your original budget spreadsheet for historical records
- Don't delete any sheets in the new copy
- Test all menu functions after setup
- Ensure you have sufficient permissions to create spreadsheet copies
- You must authorize the script in the new copy before proceeding
- The archived master will still have its script properties intact, so avoid using it for active budgeting

## Authorization Process

When you first open menu items in the new copy:

1. You'll see an "Authorization Required" dialog
2. Click "OK" to proceed
3. Select your Google account
4. Review the permissions
5. Click "Allow" to grant access
6. Wait for the authorization to complete
