guides/yearly-tasks/end-of-year/setup.mdx, before:

---
title: 'EOY Budget Setup'
description: 'Detailed guide for the End of Year budget setup process'
---

# EOY Budget Setup

This guide provides comprehensive instructions for the End of Year (EOY) budget process. You can refer to this documentation at any point during the process for detailed guidance.

## Overview of the Process

The EOY process follows these main steps:

1. **Initial Setup** (in original spreadsheet)

   - Export properties
   - Create a copy of the spreadsheet

2. **Configuration** (in new copy)

   - Authorize scripts
   - Run EOY Setup
   - Configure budget dates and settings

3. **Manual Budget Update**

   - Review last year's actuals
   - Update budget amounts
   - Balance the budget

4. **Continue EOY Setup**

   - Copy bank balances
   - Update monthly headers
   - Clear transaction sheets

5. **Finalize EOY Setup**
   - Verify all requirements
   - Register as the new master

## Pre-EOY Checks

Before beginning the EOY process, ensure:

1. **All accounts are reconciled**

   - The LastReconciliationDate should be at or near the end of the financial year (June 30)
   - All transactions should be properly categorized and reconciled

2. **Balanced sheets**
   - Banks sheet should have a zero balance in cell C30
   - Annual Budget sheet should have a zero balance in cell B106
   - Maintain Budget sheet should have a zero balance in cell E120

If any of these conditions aren't met, you should complete your reconciliation process before proceeding with EOY.

> **Note:** The system does not currently perform automatic checks for these conditions at the start of the EOY process. It's the user's responsibility to verify that these conditions are met before proceeding. A future enhancement may include automatic verification of these pre-conditions.

## Initial Setup in Original Spreadsheet

When you run "Period Processing > End of Year Process" in your original spreadsheet:

### 1. Export Properties

1. When prompted to export properties, click **YES**
2. This saves critical settings to a hidden sheet that will be copied with the spreadsheet
3. You'll see a confirmation message when the export is complete

### 2. Create a Copy

1. In Google Sheets, click **File > Make a copy**
2. Name it "Budget-YYYY" (e.g., "Budget-2025")
3. Select a destination folder
4. Click **Make a copy**

## Configuration in New Copy

After creating a copy, you'll configure it for the new year:

### 1. Authorize Scripts

1. Open the new copy
2. Navigate to **Period Processing > Run End of Year Setup**
3. If prompted for authorization:
   - Click **Continue**
   - Select your Google account
   - You will see the Google account that owns the spreadsheet (this might be your account or another account if the spreadsheet is shared with you)
   - Click **Advanced** at the bottom left
   - Click **Go to Budget App Scripts (unsafe)**
   - Select the **Select all** checkbox to grant all required permissions

If authorization fails for any reason, try refreshing the page and attempting the process again. If problems persist, contact the spreadsheet administrator.

### 2. Verification Process

After authorization, the system automatically runs verification checks:

1. Verifies all required sheets are present
2. Confirms named ranges are properly configured
3. Checks that budget formulas are valid
4. Verifies the TimeZone settings

If verification fails:

- You'll see specific error messages indicating what needs to be fixed
- Common issues include missing sheets, incorrectly named ranges, or formula errors
- Fix the reported issues and try running the setup again

If the verification passes, you'll see a "Verification Passed" message and can proceed with the next steps.

> **Note:** The "Period Processing > Verify Setup" function is automatically run as part of the EOY setup process. You don't need to run it separately unless you want to troubleshoot potential issues before starting the EOY process.

### 3. New Year Budget Setup

1. In the confirmation dialog, click **YES** to proceed
2. The system will import settings from the original spreadsheet
   - Note: The IS_MASTER flag will initially be imported as TRUE but should be FALSE until the EOY process is complete
3. In the New Year Budget Setup dialog:
   - Verify the Budget Start Date (should be set to July 1 of the new fiscal year)
   - Set the Weekly Shopping Day
   - Configure other payment dates
   - Click **Save**

## Manual Budget Update

After configuring settings and clicking Save, the system will:

1. **Automatically display the "Budget Setup Instructions" dialog** with guidance on updating your budget
2. Activate the Maintain Budget sheet
3. Scroll to the income section to help you begin the update process

> **Note:** If you close the instructions dialog and need to see it again, you can find the same information in this documentation.

### 1. Review and Update Income Sources

1. Locate the "INCOME BUDGET" section
2. For each income source:
   - Review last year's actuals in Column D
   - Update budget amounts in Column E
   - Adjust frequencies in Column F if needed (12 for monthly, 1 for annual)
   - The checkbox in Column I indicates whether the income has been distributed to the Annual Budget sheet

> **Note:** Currently, when the Frequency (F) or Budget (E) values are changed for income items, the distribute flag is not automatically reset.

### 2. Review and Update Expense Categories

1. Locate the "EXPENSE BUDGET" section
2. For each expense category:
   - Review last year's actuals in Column D
   - Update budget amounts in Column E
   - Adjust frequencies in Column F if needed (12 for monthly, 1 for annual)
   - The checkbox in Column I indicates whether the expense has been distributed to the Annual Budget sheet
   - When you update the frequency or budget amount, this flag will automatically reset

### 3. Balance Your Budget

1. Locate the "BUDGET BALANCED" cell (E120)
2. Continue adjusting income and expenses until this cell shows zero
3. This indicates your budget is balanced for the new year

### 4. Refresh Budget Calculations

1. Locate and click the **REFRESH** button at the bottom of the configuration section
2. This calculates monthly distributions based on your frequencies

## Continue EOY Setup

After manually updating your budget:

### 1. Start the Continuation Process

1. Navigate to **Period Processing > Continue EOY Setup**
2. If your budget isn't balanced, you'll be prompted to fix it first
3. When ready, click **YES** to continue

### 2. System Processes

The system will automatically:

1. Copy current bank balances to opening positions
2. Update monthly headers for the new year
3. Clear the Cash Flow and Bank Records sheets

### 3. Completion

1. The Annual Budget sheet will be activated to show the changes
2. A completion message will appear
3. Follow the instructions to proceed to the next step

## Finalize EOY Setup

The final step is to verify everything and mark this as your new master spreadsheet:

### 1. Start Finalization

1. Navigate to **Period Processing > Finalize EOY Setup**
2. The system will verify all completion criteria

### 2. Verification Checks

The system checks that:

1. Banks sheet is balanced (cell C30 = 0)
2. Annual Budget sheet is balanced (cell B106 = 0)
3. Maintain Budget sheet is balanced (cell E120 = 0)
4. All budget items have their distribution checkboxes properly set in Column I

### 3. Complete the Process

1. Click **YES** to finalize
2. The system will:
   - Initialize month statuses for the new year
   - Mark this spreadsheet as the new master (setting IS_MASTER to TRUE)
   - Show a completion message

## Troubleshooting Common Issues

### Budget Not Balancing

1. Check that all income and expense totals match
2. Look for missing items or incorrect values
3. Verify that frequencies are set correctly

### Bank Balances Not Copying Correctly

1. Make sure the Banks sheet is properly structured
2. Verify that bank account names match
3. Check that current balances are correct

### Monthly Headers Not Updating

1. Ensure the Budget Start Date is set correctly
2. Verify that the Annual Budget sheet exists
3. Check for any error messages in the dialog

## Next Steps After Completion

After completing the EOY process:

1. Verify that monthly processing works correctly
2. Test importing transactions
3. Save the original spreadsheet for historical records
4. Begin using your new budget spreadsheet

Commit message:

Update EOY documentation with legacy master archiving information

guides/yearly-tasks/end-of-year/setup.mdx, after:

---
title: 'EOY Budget Setup'
description: 'Detailed guide for the End of Year budget setup process'
---

# EOY Budget Setup

This guide provides comprehensive instructions for the End of Year (EOY) budget process. You can refer to this documentation at any point during the process for detailed guidance.

## Overview of the Process

The EOY process follows these main steps:

1. **Initial Setup** (in original spreadsheet)

   - Export properties
   - Create a copy of the spreadsheet

2. **Configuration** (in new copy)

   - Authorize scripts
   - Run EOY Setup
   - Configure budget dates and settings

3. **Manual Budget Update**

   - Review last year's actuals
   - Update budget amounts
   - Balance the budget

4. **Continue EOY Setup**

   - Copy bank balances
   - Update monthly headers
   - Clear transaction sheets

5. **Finalize EOY Setup**
   - Verify all requirements
   - Register as the new master
   - Automatically archive the legacy master

## Pre-EOY Checks

Before beginning the EOY process, ensure:

1. **All accounts are reconciled**

   - The LastReconciliationDate should be at or near the end of the financial year (June 30)
   - All transactions should be properly categorized and reconciled

2. **Balanced sheets**
   - Banks sheet should have a zero balance in cell C30
   - Annual Budget sheet should have a zero balance in cell B106
   - Maintain Budget sheet should have a zero balance in cell E120

If any of these conditions aren't met, you should complete your reconciliation process before proceeding with EOY.

> **Note:** The system does not currently perform automatic checks for these conditions at the start of the EOY process. It's the user's responsibility to verify that these conditions are met before proceeding. A future enhancement may include automatic verification of these pre-conditions.

## Initial Setup in Original Spreadsheet

When you run "Period Processing > End of Year Process" in your original spreadsheet:

### 1. Export Properties

1. When prompted to export properties, click **YES**
2. This saves critical settings to a hidden sheet that will be copied with the spreadsheet
3. You'll see a confirmation message when the export is complete

### 2. Create a Copy

1. In Google Sheets, click **File > Make a copy**
2. Name it "Budget-YYYY" (e.g., "Budget-2025")
3. Select a destination folder
4. Click **Make a copy**

## Configuration in New Copy

After creating a copy, you'll configure it for the new year:

### 1. Authorize Scripts

1. Open the new copy
2. Navigate to **Period Processing > Run End of Year Setup**
3. If prompted for authorization:
   - Click **Continue**
   - Select your Google account
   - You will see the Google account that owns the spreadsheet (this might be your account or another account if the spreadsheet is shared with you)
   - Click **Advanced** at the bottom left
   - Click **Go to Budget App Scripts (unsafe)**
   - Select the **Select all** checkbox to grant all required permissions

If authorization fails for any reason, try refreshing the page and attempting the process again. If problems persist, contact the spreadsheet administrator.

### 2. Verification Process

After authorization, the system automatically runs verification checks:

1. Verifies all required sheets are present
2. Confirms named ranges are properly configured
3. Checks that budget formulas are valid
4. Verifies the TimeZone settings

If verification fails:

- You'll see specific error messages indicating what needs to be fixed
- Common issues include missing sheets, incorrectly named ranges, or formula errors
- Fix the reported issues and try running the setup again

If the verification passes, you'll see a "Verification Passed" message and can proceed with the next steps.

> **Note:** The "Period Processing > Verify Setup" function is automatically run as part of the EOY setup process. You don't need to run it separately unless you want to troubleshoot potential issues before starting the EOY process.

### 3. New Year Budget Setup

1. In the confirmation dialog, click **YES** to proceed
2. The system will import settings from the original spreadsheet
   - Note: The IS_MASTER flag will initially be imported as TRUE but should be FALSE until the EOY process is complete
3. In the New Year Budget Setup dialog:
   - Verify the Budget Start Date (should be set to July 1 of the new fiscal year)
   - Set the Weekly Shopping Day
   - Configure other payment dates
   - Click **Save**

## Manual Budget Update

After configuring settings and clicking Save, the system will:

1. **Automatically display the "Budget Setup Instructions" dialog** with guidance on updating your budget
2. Activate the Maintain Budget sheet
3. Scroll to the income section to help you begin the update process

> **Note:** If you close the instructions dialog and need to see it again, you can find the same information in this documentation.

### 1. Review and Update Income Sources

1. Locate the "INCOME BUDGET" section
2. For each income source:
   - Review last year's actuals in Column D
   - Update budget amounts in Column E
   - Adjust frequencies in Column F if needed (12 for monthly, 1 for annual)
   - The checkbox in Column I indicates whether the income has been distributed to the Annual Budget sheet

> **Note:** Currently, when the Frequency (F) or Budget (E) values are changed for income items, the distribute flag is not automatically reset.

### 2. Review and Update Expense Categories

1. Locate the "EXPENSE BUDGET" section
2. For each expense category:
   - Review last year's actuals in Column D
   - Update budget amounts in Column E
   - Adjust frequencies in Column F if needed (12 for monthly, 1 for annual)
   - The checkbox in Column I indicates whether the expense has been distributed to the Annual Budget sheet
   - When you update the frequency or budget amount, this flag will automatically reset

### 3. Balance Your Budget

1. Locate the "BUDGET BALANCED" cell (E120)
2. Continue adjusting income and expenses until this cell shows zero
3. This indicates your budget is balanced for the new year

### 4. Refresh Budget Calculations

1. Locate and click the **REFRESH** button at the bottom of the configuration section
2. This calculates monthly distributions based on your frequencies

## Continue EOY Setup

After manually updating your budget:

### 1. Start the Continuation Process

1. Navigate to **Period Processing > Continue EOY Setup**
2. If your budget isn't balanced, you'll be prompted to fix it first
3. When ready, click **YES** to continue

### 2. System Processes

The system will automatically:

1. Copy current bank balances to opening positions
2. Update monthly headers for the new year
3. Clear the Cash Flow and Bank Records sheets

### 3. Completion

1. The Annual Budget sheet will be activated to show the changes
2. A completion message will appear
3. Follow the instructions to proceed to the next step

## Finalize EOY Setup

The final step is to verify everything and mark this as your new master spreadsheet:

### 1. Start Finalization

1. Navigate to **Period Processing > Finalize EOY Setup**
2. The system will verify all completion criteria

### 2. Verification Checks

The system checks that:

1. Banks sheet is balanced (cell C30 = 0)
2. Annual Budget sheet is balanced (cell B106 = 0)
3. Maintain Budget sheet is balanced (cell E120 = 0)
4. All budget items have their distribution checkboxes properly set in Column I

### 3. Complete the Process

1. Click **YES** to finalize
2. The system will:
   - Initialize month statuses for the new year
   - Mark this spreadsheet as the new master (setting IS_MASTER to TRUE)
   - Automatically archive the legacy master spreadsheet (rename and mark as archived)
   - Show a completion message

### 4. Legacy Master Archiving

When you finalize the EOY setup, the system will automatically archive your previous master spreadsheet by:

1. Renaming it to include "\_ARCHIVED_FY{year}" suffix (e.g., "Budget_MASTER_ARCHIVED_FY2024")
2. Adding a hidden "\_Archive" sheet with metadata including:
   - The date of archiving
   - A marker indicating it was the former master
   - The ID of the new master spreadsheet

> **Important Note:** Due to Google Apps Script limitations, the archived spreadsheet will still have its script properties set as if it were the master (IS_MASTER = true). This is a technical limitation that cannot be resolved without complex workarounds. If you open the archived spreadsheet, it may still show the "MASTER" indicator and have full functionality, but you should not use it for active budgeting.

## Troubleshooting Common Issues

### Budget Not Balancing

1. Check that all income and expense totals match
2. Look for missing items or incorrect values
3. Verify that frequencies are set correctly

### Bank Balances Not Copying Correctly

1. Make sure the Banks sheet is properly structured
2. Verify that bank account names match
3. Check that current balances are correct

### Monthly Headers Not Updating

1. Ensure the Budget Start Date is set correctly
2. Verify that the Annual Budget sheet exists
3. Check for any error messages in the dialog

### Archived Master Issues

1. If the original master is not properly archived (renamed):

   - You can manually rename it to include "\_ARCHIVED_FY{year}"
   - This is purely cosmetic and won't affect functionality

2. If you accidentally open and use the archived spreadsheet:
   - You should switch back to the new master spreadsheet
   - The archived spreadsheet should be considered read-only

## Next Steps After Completion

After completing the EOY process:

1. Verify that monthly processing works correctly
2. Test importing transactions
3. Save the original spreadsheet for historical records
4. Begin using your new budget spreadsheet
