docs/guides/yearly-tasks/end-of-year/overview.md, before:

---
title: 'End of Year Process Overview'
description: 'Learn about the End of Year (EOY) process for creating a new budget year'
---

# End of Year Process Overview

The End of Year (EOY) process helps you transition from one financial year to the next while maintaining your budget history and setting up a fresh budget for the new year.

## When to Use

The EOY process should be initiated when:

- **You're in June** (the final month of the fiscal year)
- All transactions for the current year have been reconciled
- You're ready to start planning for the next financial year (July-June)

<Warning>
**⏰ CRITICAL TIMING:** Complete the EOY process **immediately** after your fiscal year ends (June 30). Then import July transactions **within 7 days** to enable cross-year duplicate detection.

**Why This Matters:** Banks often advance transaction processing dates by 2-7 days, moving late June transactions into July. Delayed reconciliation prevents the system from catching these duplicates automatically.
</Warning>

<Note>
**Important:** The EOY process can only be started during June. If you try to access it in other months, the system will display a restriction message and block the process.
</Note>

## Process Summary

The EOY process consists of **four main steps** with clear menu-driven progression:

### 1. **Start EOY Process** (in Master Spreadsheet)
   - **Menu Item:** "Start End of Year Process"
   - Export critical properties to ensure smooth transition
   - Create a copy of your current budget spreadsheet
   - The master spreadsheet remains unchanged during this phase

### 2. **Initial Setup** (in New Copy)
   - **Menu Item:** "1. Run Initial EOY Setup"
   - Authorize scripts in the new copy
   - Configure new year settings (dates, payment schedules)
   - **Manual budget update** - Review and update all income and expense amounts

### 3. **Continue Setup** (in New Copy)
   - **Menu Item:** "2. Continue EOY Setup" - Copy bank balances and clear transaction sheets
   - **Menu Item:** "Run End of Month Process" - Complete final month processing for fiscal year
   - **Commitment Validation** - System checks for outstanding commitments with user choice (Fix Now vs Ignore)

### 4. **Finalization** (in New Copy)
   - **Menu Item:** "3. Finalize EOY Setup"
   - Verify all completion criteria are met
   - Register the new copy as the active master spreadsheet
   - **Archive the previous master** with "_ARCHIVED_FY{year}" suffix

## State-Driven Menu System

The EOY process uses an intelligent menu system that adapts based on your progress:

### In Master Spreadsheet (June only)
- **Period Processing** → **Start End of Year Process** - Begin the EOY workflow

### In Fresh Copy (Before Setup)
- **Period Processing** shows only EOY Setup options:
  - **1. Run Initial EOY Setup** - Start configuration
  - **2. Continue EOY Setup** - Available after initial setup
  - **3. Finalize EOY Setup** - Available after continuation

### In Fresh Copy (After Setup Complete)
- **Period Processing** shows normal menu:
  - **Run End of Month Process** - Normal monthly operations
  - **Start End of Year Process** - For next year's EOY

<Note>
The menu system automatically adapts based on your EOY completion status, ensuring you always see the appropriate options for your current stage.
</Note>

## Pre-EOY Requirements

Before beginning the EOY process, ensure these conditions are met:

### 1. **Month Restriction**
- Must be June (final fiscal month)
- System automatically validates this requirement

### 2. **Account Reconciliation**
- LastReconciliationDate should be at or near June 30
- All transactions properly categorized and reconciled

### 3. **Balanced Sheets** (CRITICAL - Strictly Enforced)
- **Banks sheet:** Zero balance in cell C30
- **Annual Budget sheet:** Zero balance in cell B106
- **Maintain Budget sheet:** Zero balance in cell E120

<Warning>
**🚨 CRITICAL REQUIREMENT:** The system now **strictly enforces** balance checking and will **block the EOY process** if any sheet is unbalanced.

**Why This Matters:** The EOY process copies current bank balances to become opening balances for the new fiscal year. If these are incorrect, your entire new year will start with wrong foundation data.

**❌ No Override Available:** Unlike End of Month processing, there is no "proceed anyway" option for EOY to prevent catastrophic data issues.

**💡 Solution:**
1. **First** - Update ALL bank balances to be accurate as at June 30 (banks often apply monthly interest as final transaction)
2. **Second** - Use 'Reconciliation Dashboard' to resolve any Cash Flow transaction issues (missing, extra, or unreconciled transactions)
</Warning>

### 4. **Commitment Validation** (User Choice)
- System checks for outstanding commitments during End of Month processing
- **User Choice Dialog:** Choose between "Fix Now" (NO) or "Ignore" (YES)
- **Fix Now (NO):** Address commitments before proceeding with EOM
- **Ignore (YES):** Proceed with EOM despite outstanding commitments

## Automated Master Archiving

One of the key improvements in the current EOY process is **automatic archiving** of your previous master spreadsheet:

### What Happens Automatically
When you complete "3. Finalize EOY Setup":

1. **New copy becomes the master** - Marked with `IS_MASTER = true`
2. **Previous master is automatically renamed** - Gets "_ARCHIVED_FY{year}" suffix
3. **Archive metadata is added** - Hidden "_Archive" sheet with archival information
4. **Clear separation** - No confusion about which spreadsheet to use

### Benefits
- **No manual archiving required** - System handles it automatically
- **Clear naming convention** - Archived spreadsheets are easily identifiable
- **Preserved history** - All previous data remains intact and accessible
- **Reduced errors** - No risk of accidentally using the wrong spreadsheet

## Authorization Process

When working with a new copy, you'll need to authorize the scripts. **Don't worry - this is normal and safe:**

1. **Initial Prompt** - "Authorization Required" dialog appears
2. **Google Authorization** - Select your account
3. **Security Warning** - Google will show a warning that looks scary but is normal:
   - You'll see "Google hasn't verified this app"
   - You'll see "The app is requesting access to sensitive info"
   - **This is expected** - Google shows this for all custom spreadsheet scripts
4. **Continue Despite Warning:**
   - Click **"Advanced"** (bottom left of the dialog)
   - Click **"Go to Budget App Scripts (unsafe)"** - *this is safe, just Google's standard warning*
   - **Check "Select all"** to grant required permissions
   - Click **"Allow"**
5. **Verification** - System automatically validates setup

<Warning>
**About the "Unsafe" Warning:** Google shows this warning for ALL custom spreadsheet scripts, not because there's actually a problem. The budget system is safe to authorize - it only accesses your budget spreadsheet data and nothing else.
</Warning>

<Tip>
If authorization fails, refresh the page and try again. The system includes retry logic for common authorization issues.
</Tip>

## Getting Started

### From Master Spreadsheet (June only)
1. Navigate to **Period Processing** → **Start End of Year Process**
2. Follow the guided instructions in the help dialog
3. Export properties when prompted
4. Create a copy of your spreadsheet

### From New Copy
1. Open the new copy
2. Navigate to **Period Processing** → **1. Run Initial EOY Setup**
3. **Complete authorization when prompted** - Google will show scary warnings but this is normal and safe
4. Follow the four-step process through to finalization

## Documentation and Support

- **Step-by-step instructions:** [EOY Budget Setup](setup.md)
- **Technical details:** [Developer Guide](developer-guide.md)
- **Troubleshooting:** [Common Issues](../../troubleshooting/common-issues.md)

<Note>
The complete documentation is accessible at any time during the EOY process through menu links and help dialogs. You don't need to complete the process in one session - you can refer back to the documentation as needed.
</Note>

Commit message:

CORRECT EOY documentation - Fix inaccurate automatic archiving claims
- Remove false claims about 'automatic master archiving'
- Document actual manual archiving process (user-initiated)
- Update all references to reflect real two-step process:
  1. EOY finalization marks new copy as master
  2. User manually archives old master via Settings menu
- Add technical details showing actual code implementation
- Clarify that archiving is completely user-controlled
- Update developer guide with correct archiving workflow

docs/guides/yearly-tasks/end-of-year/overview.md, after:

---
title: 'End of Year Process Overview'
description: 'Learn about the End of Year (EOY) process for creating a new budget year'
---

# End of Year Process Overview

The End of Year (EOY) process helps you transition from one financial year to the next while maintaining your budget history and setting up a fresh budget for the new year.

## When to Use

The EOY process should be initiated when:

- **You're in June** (the final month of the fiscal year)
- All transactions for the current year have been reconciled
- You're ready to start planning for the next financial year (July-June)

<Warning>
**⏰ CRITICAL TIMING:** Complete the EOY process **immediately** after your fiscal year ends (June 30). Then import July transactions **within 7 days** to enable cross-year duplicate detection.

**Why This Matters:** Banks often advance transaction processing dates by 2-7 days, moving late June transactions into July. Delayed reconciliation prevents the system from catching these duplicates automatically.
</Warning>

<Note>
**Important:** The EOY process can only be started during June. If you try to access it in other months, the system will display a restriction message and block the process.
</Note>

## Process Summary

The EOY process consists of **four main steps** with clear menu-driven progression:

### 1. **Start EOY Process** (in Master Spreadsheet)
   - **Menu Item:** "Start End of Year Process"
   - Export critical properties to ensure smooth transition
   - Create a copy of your current budget spreadsheet
   - The master spreadsheet remains unchanged during this phase

### 2. **Initial Setup** (in New Copy)
   - **Menu Item:** "1. Run Initial EOY Setup"
   - Authorize scripts in the new copy
   - Configure new year settings (dates, payment schedules)
   - **Manual budget update** - Review and update all income and expense amounts

### 3. **Continue Setup** (in New Copy)
   - **Menu Item:** "2. Continue EOY Setup" - Copy bank balances and clear transaction sheets
   - **Menu Item:** "Run End of Month Process" - Complete final month processing for fiscal year
   - **Commitment Validation** - System checks for outstanding commitments with user choice (Fix Now vs Ignore)

### 4. **Finalization** (in New Copy)
   - **Menu Item:** "3. Finalize EOY Setup"
   - Verify all completion criteria are met
   - Register the new copy as the active master spreadsheet
   - **Archive the previous master** with "_ARCHIVED_FY{year}" suffix

## State-Driven Menu System

The EOY process uses an intelligent menu system that adapts based on your progress:

### In Master Spreadsheet (June only)
- **Period Processing** → **Start End of Year Process** - Begin the EOY workflow

### In Fresh Copy (Before Setup)
- **Period Processing** shows only EOY Setup options:
  - **1. Run Initial EOY Setup** - Start configuration
  - **2. Continue EOY Setup** - Available after initial setup
  - **3. Finalize EOY Setup** - Available after continuation

### In Fresh Copy (After Setup Complete)
- **Period Processing** shows normal menu:
  - **Run End of Month Process** - Normal monthly operations
  - **Start End of Year Process** - For next year's EOY

<Note>
The menu system automatically adapts based on your EOY completion status, ensuring you always see the appropriate options for your current stage.
</Note>

## Pre-EOY Requirements

Before beginning the EOY process, ensure these conditions are met:

### 1. **Month Restriction**
- Must be June (final fiscal month)
- System automatically validates this requirement

### 2. **Account Reconciliation**
- LastReconciliationDate should be at or near June 30
- All transactions properly categorized and reconciled

### 3. **Balanced Sheets** (CRITICAL - Strictly Enforced)
- **Banks sheet:** Zero balance in cell C30
- **Annual Budget sheet:** Zero balance in cell B106
- **Maintain Budget sheet:** Zero balance in cell E120

<Warning>
**🚨 CRITICAL REQUIREMENT:** The system now **strictly enforces** balance checking and will **block the EOY process** if any sheet is unbalanced.

**Why This Matters:** The EOY process copies current bank balances to become opening balances for the new fiscal year. If these are incorrect, your entire new year will start with wrong foundation data.

**❌ No Override Available:** Unlike End of Month processing, there is no "proceed anyway" option for EOY to prevent catastrophic data issues.

**💡 Solution:**
1. **First** - Update ALL bank balances to be accurate as at June 30 (banks often apply monthly interest as final transaction)
2. **Second** - Use 'Reconciliation Dashboard' to resolve any Cash Flow transaction issues (missing, extra, or unreconciled transactions)
</Warning>

### 4. **Commitment Validation** (User Choice)
- System checks for outstanding commitments during End of Month processing
- **User Choice Dialog:** Choose between "Fix Now" (NO) or "Ignore" (YES)
- **Fix Now (NO):** Address commitments before proceeding with EOM
- **Ignore (YES):** Proceed with EOM despite outstanding commitments

## Master Archiving Process

The EOY process includes a **guided archiving system** for your previous master spreadsheet:

### What Happens During Finalization
When you complete "3. Finalize EOY Setup":

1. **New copy becomes the master** - Marked with `IS_MASTER = true`
2. **Completion dialog appears** - Shows next steps including archiving instructions
3. **Old master remains active** - Still accessible and functional
4. **User guidance provided** - Clear instructions for manual archiving

### Manual Archiving Required
After EOY finalization, you must manually archive the old master:

1. **Go to your old master spreadsheet** (the one you copied from)
2. **Navigate to Settings → ⚠️ Advanced → Archive This Master**
3. **Confirm archiving** when prompted
4. **System automatically:**
   - Renames spreadsheet with "_ARCHIVED_FY{year}" suffix
   - Adds archive metadata in hidden "_Archive" sheet
   - Marks as archived (`IS_ARCHIVED = true`)

### Benefits
- **User control** - You decide when to archive the old master
- **Clear naming convention** - Archived spreadsheets are easily identifiable
- **Preserved history** - All previous data remains intact and accessible
- **Reversible process** - Can restore from archive if needed

## Authorization Process

When working with a new copy, you'll need to authorize the scripts. **Don't worry - this is normal and safe:**

1. **Initial Prompt** - "Authorization Required" dialog appears
2. **Google Authorization** - Select your account
3. **Security Warning** - Google will show a warning that looks scary but is normal:
   - You'll see "Google hasn't verified this app"
   - You'll see "The app is requesting access to sensitive info"
   - **This is expected** - Google shows this for all custom spreadsheet scripts
4. **Continue Despite Warning:**
   - Click **"Advanced"** (bottom left of the dialog)
   - Click **"Go to Budget App Scripts (unsafe)"** - *this is safe, just Google's standard warning*
   - **Check "Select all"** to grant required permissions
   - Click **"Allow"**
5. **Verification** - System automatically validates setup

<Warning>
**About the "Unsafe" Warning:** Google shows this warning for ALL custom spreadsheet scripts, not because there's actually a problem. The budget system is safe to authorize - it only accesses your budget spreadsheet data and nothing else.
</Warning>

<Tip>
If authorization fails, refresh the page and try again. The system includes retry logic for common authorization issues.
</Tip>

## Getting Started

### From Master Spreadsheet (June only)
1. Navigate to **Period Processing** → **Start End of Year Process**
2. Follow the guided instructions in the help dialog
3. Export properties when prompted
4. Create a copy of your spreadsheet

### From New Copy
1. Open the new copy
2. Navigate to **Period Processing** → **1. Run Initial EOY Setup**
3. **Complete authorization when prompted** - Google will show scary warnings but this is normal and safe
4. Follow the four-step process through to finalization

## Documentation and Support

- **Step-by-step instructions:** [EOY Budget Setup](setup.md)
- **Technical details:** [Developer Guide](developer-guide.md)
- **Troubleshooting:** [Common Issues](../../troubleshooting/common-issues.md)

<Note>
The complete documentation is accessible at any time during the EOY process through menu links and help dialogs. You don't need to complete the process in one session - you can refer back to the documentation as needed.
</Note>
